Hey friends. I want to
introduce a new sponsor to
you. H M a VPN.
It's a VPN you can
count on. As you know,
I do a lot of
travel and I tend to
connect to a lot of
untrusted wireless networks. And I
probably shouldn't, but I can
use HMA as the world's
largest VPN service offers. The
most server locations worldwide covers
190 countries. There's always a
server nearby it. Doesn't log
your IP address and allows
me to connect five devices
simultaneously works on basically all
platforms, Android, iOS, Mac, Linux,
windows routers, wherever it's actually
been completely redesigned recently to
make it even simpler and
more fun to use. And
there's even a smart kill
switch. That'll turn the VPN
automatically on when you launch
sensitive apps, here's your call
to action. My friends try
HMA VPN risk-free with a
30 day money back guarantee.
This deal is for Hanselman
its listeners. That's HMA, vpn.com/offer
hyphen Hansel minutes. That's HMA
vpn.com/offer-hansel minutes. Scott Hanselman. This
is That's minutes today. I'm
talking with Ben eater, eater.net.
That's a T E r.net.
You can see all of
the great content and projects
that he's working on. The
one that he is known
for and his people are
excited about this year is
building a 65 Oh two
computer building on some of
the work that he had
done. Building a computer from
basic basic parts. How are
you, sir? Good. How are
you, Scott? I am a
little bit overwhelmed. I've got
the psychic weight of this
computer. That's half built on
my kitchen counter. I've been
told by my spouse to
move it into the dining
room. Yes, you've gone fully
down the rabbit hole. I
surely have. I almost think,
I feel like I need
a room to build this
in because at first I
over, I was a desk
and then a counter. And
now it's the entire dining
room table. Yeah. Sorry to
have taken over your life
there. How did you decide
that this was a thing
you wanted to do? And
like, I'm trying to understand
your, I would like to
actually hear back up a
little bit. Your background. Are
you an electrical engineer? Is
that what you took in
college? No. So I guess
I started in college studying
computer science and never ended
up finishing that degree. This
was sort of the mid
nineties and it turned out
to, for a variety of
reasons to make more sense,
to just dive into industry.
And from there got heavily
involved in computer networking. And
so I spent maybe 15
years doing sort of systems
engineering with computer networks. And,
and then from that kind
of move back towards software
engineering and spent the last
seven or eight years doing
software at Khan Academy. And
so it was really a
Khan Academy that I got
interested in making my own
content and started making YouTube
videos on hardware, which had
always been an interest and
a passion. And, you know,
I've, I've always been tinkering
with various hardware projects and,
and computer related projects. As
I started making videos of
this eight bit CPU from
scratch as just kind of
a, you know, a thing
that I was interested in,
in sharing. There's a lot
of diversity of, of knowledge
and background in the computer
science industry. Like we all
call ourselves software engineers and
there's lots of people saying,
Oh, I'm a front end
engineer. And I do, I
do, you know, jQuery and
I do angular and I
do that, but we're also
offering engineers. But at the
same time though, someone may
have gone to MIT and
come out of that with
a master's degree in these
things and built an AP,
a CPU from scratch. Now
you're telling me, and I'm
just learning this for the
first time that you never
even finished your degree. And
you're doing this, I'm feeling
like as I'm learning and
going through this process myself,
that I've clearly either missed
a class or forgotten to
take something. How did you
pick this stuff up? Is
this just literally reading and
absorbing and reading and absorbing
because not every front end
JavaScript engineer knows what an
end gate is. Sure. Yeah.
I think it's just been
something I've always been around
to some degree. So, you
know, as far back as,
as high school and even
middle school, I was interested
in programming and interested in,
in, in computer hardware and
that sort of thing. And,
you know, back then, you
know, we didn't have Arduinos,
but you could plug things
into like the printer port
on your computer. And that
gave you eight bits of
digital IO that you could
do things with kind of
like what people do with
Arduinos today. And so, you
know, I would do that.
And then the next level
beyond that is, you know,
you could, you can build
a card that plugs into
the bus and your computer
and the old ISA bus,
and that gives you more
IO possibilities. And so I
I'd done things like that,
you know, just tinkering around
in high school and then
know, like I said, a
lot of that kind of
went on the shelf for
awhile. As I got into
my career, focused more on
higher level of networking stuff
and then software, you know,
front end software engineering. And,
and then that was something
I just wanted to kind
of get back into as
a hobby. When you put
something like this together, though,
you speak with a patient
and a quiet authority where
I, as the viewer am
going well, Ben really knows
what he's talking about, you
know? And certainly there's always
people on the internet saying,
Oh, well you did that
wrong. Or we are wired
the circuit that way or
whatever, but how do you
feel qualified to build something
like this? And did it
take any amount of like,
okay, I can do this.
Like I could build an
eight bit CPU from scratch
and I, and I can
say this and put it
down on the internet and
people will enjoy it. Yeah.
That's a good question. I
mean, that's a, I think
a good question for anyone.
Like when, when are you
an authority? It's like, are
you learning or are you
like the teacher that we've
all had? Who's just one
chapter ahead. I hope I'm
more than one chapter ahead.
I know that I'm several
chapters behind I'm enjoying I'm
enjoying that very much. Yeah.
Yeah, no, I mean, these
are, like I said, these
are, these are projects and
things that I've, I've always
had an interest in. And
so it's been something that
I've been absorbing over, you
know, I think a long
period of time. And so
I've had a lot of
time to sort of think
about it and think about,
you know, how do I
make sense of this? And
I think to some degree,
that is what people find
interesting or fresh about, about
the content I'm making is
I'm coming at it from,
you know, this is how
my brain has processed this
stuff over a number of
years. This isn't, this isn't
a regurgitation of how it
was structured in a textbook.
When I first learned It
is a combination informally Experience.
Yeah. Yeah. And I think,
I mean, I think the
traditional way that you, you
might, a professor might teach
a class along these lines
would be, you know, there
was some curriculum that was
set out and then that
professor, you know, learn that
curriculum and has always had
that framework for understanding it.
And then that the gaps
have been filled in over
many years of experience of
course. But I think there's
still that same fundamental framework
underneath that. Whereas I think
to the extent that I'm
doing something new here, it's,
you know, because I didn't
start with a framework and
I just kind of piece
this stuff together on my
own, over a period of,
you know, at this point
a couple of decades. Yeah.
I, I maybe have just
a little bit different perspective
on it, which is, which
is what I think people
think, Right. And that perspective
offers that, that freshness. And
it's had a number of
times where I've been doing
stuff. Of course, I'm not
doing the AP at CPU
from scratch. I'm doing the
65 Oh two, which still
feels pretty low level to
me. And I've been doing
this for almost 30 years
and I have had at
least a half dozen times,
including once were literal jaw
drop. And I, and I
was like, you know, I
don't talk to myself. Some
people sit quietly in their
room and they have full
on conversations with themselves, but
I literally was doing this.
I think I was somewhere
in like hour 11 or
12. And I was just,
and I literally was like,
Oh, and like, you know,
30 years of like, I
thought it worked this way
and it worked that way
kind of happened. I'm really
curious what that moment was
When I actually wrote a
little bit about it. But
it was one of those
things where it was a
combination of understanding the rising
edge versus the, the, the,
the trailing as like when
things occur, the, you know,
polling versus interrupts and how
data was flowing from the
prom into the computer. And
then out into the, the,
the latched chip. And I
had swapped two wires. So
I had eight, I had
my eight bits wires of
four and five were swapped.
And I was frustrated because
this thing would keep, keep
getting like, you know what,
let me look at, I
actually, I wrote this up,
I getting a, B two
and I wanted AA and
I was just getting angry.
And I wasn't thinking I
was just getting angry and
I kept thinking, I know
what I want to come
getting. And I was like,
you know, I've done something
wrong. And I took the
whole thing apart and rewired
took the whole thing and
rewired it. And I was
thinking about things in terms
of hex. And I, I
think about hex in terms
of colors, because I've been
spending as much time on
the web. So, so AA,
I can tell you what
color it is, but I
can't see the binary. So
I stopped and thought, and
I said, hang on. What
the heck am I actually
doing here? And that moment
took me from simply following
your videos and moving my
hands the way you were
moving your hands so that
I might copy you to
a moment where I went,
Oh, B two is one
zero, one, one zero. Like
it's like, I was trying
to go at one zero
one zero one zero one.
And I said, Oh, and
I just, my brain drew
a direct line between, there's
a, there's five volts on
that. I have literally flipped
these two wires and I
just flipped them. And then
the thing worked and it
was like, it went, it
went from totally completely, utterly
useless does not work to
work exactly. As Ben said,
it would because of these
two wires. And it was
just a moment where software
and hardware and electrons came
together into this Venn diagram.
And I just went, Oh,
and then I, of course,
I'm finding myself on my,
you know, quad processor, Intel,
whatever going, how does this
thing even working at all?
Like, it's a miracle that
the house of cards that
has me building here is
a thing. It is. I
mean, yeah, it is amazing.
But, but no. Yeah, I
think, I think that is
an interesting insight. You know,
that as, as a software
engineer, as you, just the
way you think about problems,
you don't generally have to
think about, you know, maybe
two bits on my bus
or swapped And maybe the
operating center, maybe they are
swapped. And the operating system
is cleaning up for me
when I was starting out.
I think we're probably somewhat
contemporaries in age, we were
thinking about big Indian and
little Indian on the network
and who, who was doing
that and who was paying
the computational price for the
Indian swap as you move
off the network and under
the process. And now that's
just long forgotten. Yeah. But
they're still hard to know
What are you going to
do it, which actually lets
me one thing I wanted
to ask you. And I've
mentioned this before in other
shows, is that, what do
you think the value is
about learning about the metal?
Because a young person on
my team said that they
don't learn from the metal
up as I did. And
it's, it sounds like you
did. They learned from the
screen back. So for them,
the metal is F 12
tools and then they tunnel
into the computer from there
until they decide that they've
reached a layer of obstruction
that they're comfortable with. I'm
enjoying learning from lower down
than I've ever been. And
then tunneling back up. I
don't, I don't know that
there's necessarily a, I don't
know. I go back and
forth on whether there's some,
you know, strong pedagogical stance
I could take about why
one is better than the
other. And I, I just,
I don't know if I
can, but, but the one
thing I can say is
that there is always a
sense of mystery that you
have when you look at
a computer, unless you start
from those first principles. Although
I guess you still have
to, you still have to
draw a line of like,
where are those first principles?
Because even if you start
at the, at the, at
the beginning with, with electrons,
you could still be going
and asking questions about physics.
And we don't know the
answer to those, but I,
but I think if you're
willing to accept some basics
about physics and work up
from there, then I think
you can develop the sense
that, okay, computers are not
magical. They're just really complex.
And it's, you know, it's
miraculous that, you know, a
modern computer does what it,
what it does, but it's,
it's miraculous just in the
sense of like, wow, it's
really amazing what humans can
do. And the idea that
we've miniaturized it. And even
now looking at your giant
eight bit CPU from scratch,
I still am not a
hundred percent clear on inside
the 7,400 series chips and,
and gate, like, how is
it right. Doing the end?
Yeah. I do have videos
on that. So I haven't.
Okay. Yeah. I've got, I've
got videos where I talk
about the chemistry of semiconductors
and how a transistor works
and then how you can
build an Gates from transistors
and then from that kind
of launch into, okay, let's
build a computer Gates. Okay.
So that is my missing
piece then. Yeah. And I'm
looking here on your YouTube
at YouTube slash eater BC,
you've got all the way
down to the lowest, lowest
levels and you have, and
they're really Willy well paced,
but I still find myself
pausing for a second cause
I need to absorb, you
know what I mean? You
don't. Yeah, Yeah. I am.
I mean, my goal is
to not leave anything out.
So I don't, I don't
want this sort of hand
wavy, like, okay, this is
roughly how it works. And
then like fast forward, a
little bit near here at
works and lead out some
detail. You know, I always,
I always want you to
be able to say, well,
wait a minute. Why is
that? And have that answer
in there somewhere. But at
the same time, I don't
want the videos to drag
on and on and on
and on covering every little,
you know, detailing in detail.
So it's a, it's a
balancing act. And I think,
you know, what you're recognizing
is, is, you know, hopefully
what I'm aiming for, which
is that you can sit
back and watch the whole
thing. And I think kind
of soak it in and
get a sense of like,
okay, this all makes sense.
But then if you really
want to understand it, you
do need to go slower
and really process everything that's
there because hopefully there is
some information density Back. If
one goes to your videos
on YouTube and goes back
to 60 years ago, there
is a, there is a,
a Khan Academy ask style.
It appears that you're here
using the same software and
the same kind of style.
And then somewhere as you
get into the latches and
flops and the other stuff
you've developed your own style,
which is, you know, a
black background and your hands
and your peaceful voice and
a pen. And most recently
you've even been taking pieces
of paper with cutouts of
other pieces of paper and
doing this kind of cool
replacement. Did you, were you
initially copying Khan because it
was what you were doing
at the word at work
and then how did you
develop your own style? Yeah,
it just happened naturally. I
mean, I think just like
you said, I was working
at Khan Academy and so,
you know, I look, look
at Sal and I see
what he's doing. And I'm
like, Oh, that's working. Let
me get a pen tablet
and do that. And I
started doing that. And, and
then I think as I,
as I transitioned to the
physical world and that sort
of forced me to change
style a little bit because
the, with the pen tablet,
of course, you've got, you
know, the pen tablets, all,
it's all digital, even though
you're writing, you know, but
when I started pulling out,
okay, here's a breadboard, here's
a transistor, you know, started
building something. It's like, okay,
now I need a camera
pointed at what I'm doing.
And I, there are maybe
some really old videos where
I kind of toggled back
and forth between the pen
tablet and the camera and,
and that got a little
bit cumbersome. And so, yeah,
I just started drawing on
paper and then just over
time, the style developed to
what it is. So, you
know, I very much was
like, okay, let me imitate
this thing that I, that
I see that works. But
then as, as time progresses,
it became my own, Hey
friends, you know how I
love great podcasts. And I
want you to check out
the code newbie podcasts, all
about stories from folks on
their coding journey. They talked
to new developers, experienced developers
and everyone in between about
how they got started learning
to code how they navigate
their technical careers. And they
also do deep dives into
technical topics in a newbie
friendly way, check out their
podcast at www dot COVID,
newbie that's any w B
I e.org/podcast. That's code newbie.org/podcast.
I love also that a
community has built around your
videos to augment and to
fill in things that you
might find easier, intuitive, that
they might find less. So,
so for example, your videos,
the ones that I'm doing
through are the four main
videos on the 65 Oh
two and they're are between
a half an hour and
an hour long. And the
last one I just did
was 15 minutes long, and
it took me about five
to six hours to get
through it because there's moments
where you'll say, I'm going
to wire this, and then
you fast forward time. And
I pause it. And there's
a great community on Reddit,
under your Reddit on your
name, where people actually made
PDFs of chip diagrams that
I can then paste to
the top of my chips.
They have the pin outs,
and I discovered that five
hours into it. And it
really sped me up and
helped me out a lot.
Yeah. The community is really
amazing. And yeah, I don't,
didn't expect that when I
started making these videos, for
sure. They're very kind and
very helpful. And they've also,
they kind of acted as
your tech support, you know?
Yes. Which I definitely appreciate
since I obviously don't have
the time to answer every
possible. Have you made this,
your full time thing? Is
this what you're doing now?
It is. Yeah. What does
that mean? Is that, do
you like just wake up
and wait for the spirit
to move you? Or do
you like God to make
the videos It's somewhere in
between, you know, some days,
some days I feel a
little more inspired than others,
but you know, the, the,
the downside, I guess, of
having that community is I
do feel like I owe
something to these people and,
you know, I've made a
commitment to getting this series
of videos out. And at
the same time I'm thinking
about, okay, what's the next
project I'm going to do.
And, but yeah, it's, it's
certainly different than previously. When
I was at Khan Academy,
working on a software engineering
team, A lot of people
since I've been building the
65 Oh two and I
get to be clear to
the audience, what I did
is I, I, I discovered
Ben site, I watched the
videos. I was like, Oh
my goodness, I'm going to
build that. I thought about
buying the parts. And then
I went and saw that
you had done all that
work for us and bag
them and put them in
a box. So you can
buy a kit to do
the projects that Ben does
yourself. I bought the kit
and then I also got
the clock module and that
included an apron programmer. And
then I bought an inexpensive,
tiny little as telescope. Each
time I felt I was
in over my head and
people are asking me, well,
what, what level should I
be? How do you answer
a question like that? How
do you say what, where
should people be to be
able to do this project?
I don't really know how
to answer that question. I
mean, my, the best answer
I can give is watch
all the videos, you know,
just, just sit down and
finish the series and draw
your own conclusion. I mean,
you know, the videos don't
hide anything. I don't think
that's not my intent anyway.
So, you know, the question
is, can you do what,
what you see me doing
and do the things that
I'm saying in those videos
make sense to you? Can
you follow along? Do you
feel like, Oh, I'm getting
left behind and I, and
I, I'm not really sure
what's going on here, but
I think if, yeah, if
you, if you watch through
a series that you're there
thinking to see if you're
interested in the 65 Oh
two series, you know, watch
through those four videos and
just kinda judge for yourself,
like, did that make sense?
Did the parts that were
a little hand wavy to
me, do, what do I
do? I think I can
dig in and really understand
that. Or were there just
concepts that just, you know,
I just feel like I
have no idea where to
even get a toehold. That
that would be my advice
is, is just, just watch
the videos they're free and
yeah. Come, come to your
own conclusion about whether it
makes sense to you. And
I, and I think if
it does make sense to
you, I think you've got
a pretty good shot at
being able to do it
yourself. Now you will find
as you do it yourself,
that there are lots of
things you, you probably didn't
pick up on in the
videos when you watch them
the first time. So it's
not necessarily gonna be an
easy project, but that's to
some degree point, I mean,
I think it's, I think
it's a unique aspect of
this is that is that
it's not kind of a
paint by number kit where
you just, you know, pull
the things out, like a,
like a Lego set and
just snap it together. And
it works. That is a
really good thing to point
out because I didn't think
it was, but also, I
didn't know. I didn't really
realize that. I didn't know
a bunch of things like
you do, you do some
cool stuff to move the
process forward. You've got pre-stripped
wires. They also have to
be pre bent. So I'll
pause something and you'll go,
yeah, here's, you know, 16
pins here and then you've
gone and you've hooked up
the Arduino and you're going
to do, you know, 32
pins. And then that's like
a half an hour and
I had to, and then
you also undo it and
do it again and undo
do it and do it
again. And I was just
like, this is take some
time. And then I go
and I learn other techniques.
I get a wire stripper,
or I, you know, I,
I go, well, this isn't
the right tool for the
job. I'll use this tool.
There is the assumption that
there's a certain amount of
familiarity with these, these portable
breadboards, with the ability to
use a multimedia, even where
I thought I knew how
to use a multimeter, but
I really didn't until I
was forced to. Yeah, it's
interesting. Cause I think I'm
learning as well, like where
the gaps are with people.
Cause I there's certain assumptions
I make, you know, they're
obviously baked into the videos
because I made them and
then I'm realizing, Oh wait
a minute. Okay. Maybe some
of these things are, are
not obvious to people or,
or the things that I
thought might be challenging, but
that's where, you know, it's
really encouraging to me to
see the community stepping up
and filling in some of
those gaps. And I keep
asking myself though, because I
have taken II classes, I'll
be it 30 years ago,
you'll say something casually like,
Oh, and this is happening
on the rising edge or,
well, this is a pull
up resistor or pull down
resistor. And then it's like,
Oh my goodness. And then
I'm off watching someone else's
video. I want to pull
up resistors. And I, and
I go to myself, like,
how far are you going
to become the Khan Academy
for all things? A electron.
Yeah. I don't, I don't
know. Like, yeah, it doesn't
make sense for me to
make a video on pull
up resistors. I don't, I
don't know. Does the question
is though when I hear
a word I don't know,
or a phrase and I
like, Oh, this is a
concept that people who do
this should know, and then
I go off and I
learn about that thing. That
is definitely a self starter
project. I like that. You
said it's not paint by
numbers. Yeah, yeah, no, I
think for sure. But I
think if you are sufficiently
motivated, it's, you know, hopefully
I've been having a blast.
Like I said, I'm about
11, 12 hours into it.
I've made it through two
videos taken over that one
part of the house. One
of the things that's interesting
also about these videos from
a very much a self
learning perspective is do I
stop when I got it
to work or do I
stop when I understand how
I got it to work?
Right. I would, I would
encourage you to stop. I
get it. Like I got
the clock to work and
I moved on to a
hello world. And then I
said, I got to back
up and remind myself how
the clock works. Get a
few sleeps in to put
that memory into the medium
storage. So I don't lose
that short term memory. Right.
And then right now I'm
on part two moving into
part three and I've got
it working, but I'm having
some, I don't know, I'll
just call them quantum effects
or, you know, some Heisenberg
uncertainty principle where if I
look at it, it changes
it. And I don't know
well, but there's a reason
though, and this is the
part because you've, you've baked
me in with multiple hours
of like, well, this is
deterministic. If something's not working,
it's, there's a reason it's
kind of cool. There's no
one to blame, but, but
God himself and your, and
yourself, I can't blame you.
It works in your video.
It must be me or
the corks that are preventing
this from happening. Right. You
know? And that's the mystery.
Yeah, yeah. Yeah. What do
you do about that? Like,
I've known that you follow
you. I don't see that
you're super active on Reddit,
but people are super active
on your Reddit having conversations
about like, I don't know
how Ben ever got this
to work and then other
people are like, Oh, but
this is amazing. It worked
on the first try these
a, is it just a
matter of wires swapping or
is it quality of components?
Some of the things about
maybe the power supply doesn't
have enough voltage if you've
seen some of those comments
and I'm curious your experience
with how many people have
had those issues when putting
the kids together. Yeah, I
do. I do generally try
to follow the Reddit. I
know I'm not super active.
A lot of that though
comes down to the fact
that there are other people
that jump in with the
right answer sooner than I
get around to it. But
no, I am generally aware
of some of those. I
think one of the biggest
things, as far as I
can tell is quality of
breadboards. Really? This is something
that I, yeah, this is
something that I learned as,
as a part of this
project that I, that I
would not have suspected beforehand,
which is that there is
a huge difference in the
build quality of different breadboards.
And, and that's reflected generally
in the price. I mean,
I guess, you know, an
imperfect proxy, but the difference
between a $2 breadboard and
a $10 breadboard is just
night and day. And if
you pull them apart and
at some point I want
to do a video or
at least a blog post
or something, because I got
some really cool pictures under
microscope of the parts and
stuff. When you pull apart
a breadboard and just the,
the different, even just the
different alloys of metal that
they use in there, some
are more springy than others.
Wow. Yeah. Yeah. So the,
the really good quality ones,
they use some alloy that's
very springy. And so when
you stick a wire in
and out, a bunch of
times, it always snapped back
and has the same, you
know, grippiness on that wire,
whereas the cheap ones will
deform. And once you've shoved
a wire in and out,
you know, enough times, it
just doesn't have the same
grip anymore. And then you
end up with these really
sort of flaky connections And
F and flakies are the
problem. That's the thing. And
that's Oh yeah. Yeah. Well,
as you, as you mentioned,
like you get two bits
swapped and you have a
computer that is a computer.
So, so one, one wire
can, It's so funny though,
because it really like the
lower level. You, it sounds,
it's so obvious, but again,
I can't express enough what
a, an eyeopening experiences is.
Like, these may be silly
and stupid questions that I'm
asking, but it's like, yeah.
You know, that's the million
dollar semi-colon or whatever. It's
like, yeah, like that one
bit that is now a
brick. It was a computer
a minute ago, and now
it is no longer a
computer. Right. And there's, There's
nothing. So like another thing
that I've had, I've now
that I've, now that I've
gotten farther into the project,
I've got four breadboards all
working together. I need to
make sure that voltage is
going smoothly across all four.
Cause I've, I've lined all
my rails up. Some people
have suggested running power down
multiple rails from multiple locations.
Yep. Yeah. That does. Is
that, is that, is that
a thing like, is that
say like, I can do
that. I can get other
throw five volts altogether and
down each. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
In parallel. Sure. Yeah. Yeah.
There's a video as part
of the, the eight-bit CPU,
which is 14 breadboards also
connected together where I talk
about power distribution and that's,
and that's one of the
things I recommended in that
video. And that's one of
the things that is, is
interesting about this is that
I'm doing it on breadboards,
which I think most professional
electrical engineers would look at
that and say, why in
the world would you do
that? Like, just get, just
make a printed circuit board.
They're they're cheap and easy
and you can get them
turned around from China and
in a week, or even
less, and get a custom
printed circuit board, solder everything
on, you know, all the
connections are there. You, you
know, you design the printed
circuit board in a EDA
tool that, that does have
a linter effectively, you know,
design rule, checking, electrical, checking,
you know, thing that checks
that why not do that?
And I think the value
of the breadboard is that
you, it forces you to
think about every connection in
a way that I think
if, if you were to
lay out the, the, the
printed circuit board yourself and
order your own, that might,
that might have some, some
value, but this is something
I've always been frustrated as,
as a kid, I'd buy
these like educational, electronic kits
and you get a bunch
of components and you get
a printed circuit board and
you'd it, the components under
the board, and it would
just work and you wouldn't
learn anything. So that's, that's
like the, I guess that's
sort of the, the reason
that I really like the,
you know, build a computer
on a breadboard idea of,
of, you know, this forces
you to get every connection.
Right. And think about every
connection and run into those
problems where you have two
bits swapped and you aren't
getting the right result and
you pull your hair out
for a couple hours trying
to figure out why, and
then realize, Oh, I just
had these two pins swapped
or whatever it is. I
think there's value in that.
But it definitely comes with
this downside of all. Now
there's just a whole bunch
of connections that could potentially
be. Yeah. Yeah. There is
a bit of psychic weight
that, what other things have
I not found yet? And
I'll get another few hours
in the next video and
discover that, well, you know,
this, you know, whatever the
ReadWrite is SWAT or something,
something silly like that. But
at the same time, I'm
also noticing that there's a
certain temperament of a programmer
where I have been frustrated,
but I haven't been, you
know, slammed my hand on
the table, frustrated. It's been
more of a contemplative wander
around the neighborhood, talking to
myself, you know, Well, you
have to have that If
you're a programmer and I
have very much enjoyed the,
like, I don't think I
can do this right outside
my comfort zone. I'm fully
over my head on this
project, but still I rise.
Right. No, yeah, that's perfect.
I appreciate that. One of
the other things that you
did that I thought was
really cool was the use
of an Arduino versus a
very expensive piece of machinery
that I could potentially buy.
Maybe you could speak about
why we throw an Arduino
in here, what that allows
me to visualize. Yeah. So
if you're designing a digital
logic circuit, and one of
the fundamental tools you would
have in your, in your
toolbox is a logic analyzer,
which is this thing that
has, you know, dozens of
different probes that you can
put on different signals. And
then it will essentially sample
the voltage levels on all
of those signals and present
it to you on a,
in some way that you
can sort of see what's
going on. So, you know,
in, in a computer, like
what we're building with the
65 Oh two project, you've
got a 16 bit address
bus, you've got an eight
bit data bus. And as
the computer is running, it's
putting different addresses on the
address bus and it's reading
or writing different data values
on the data bus. And
so if you were building
this, or if you're engineering
this thing, you might, you
might have a logic analyzer
hooked up to all those
different signals and being able
to monitor them over time.
And then the logic analyzer
will give you features about
being able to, you know,
take those signals and view
them in, in hexadecimal or
whatever format you want. And
I think you need something
like that to really understand
what's going on with a
computer or, or to debug.
I mean, the situation you
had where you had a
bit swapped, if you had
continued down the path and
built IO and hooked a
little LCD screen or something
up to it, and then
it, and you still had
that, those pin swapped, you
would, I don't know how
you would find that, that
error without some type of
logic analyzer, but for someone
to be able to do
this project, you know, I
think it's a tall order
to say, Oh, buy a
$300 logic analyzer thousand dollar
logic analyzer or something. So
because the computers running so
slow, you can actually use
an Arduino that has the
same number of data pins
as a effectively as a
logic analyzer and just feed
in all of those, all
of those bits. You want
to monitor into digital inputs
on the Arduino and then
have the Arduino just tell
you what's on each of
those pins. And, you know,
the Arduino is not going
to be able to read
as quickly as a logic
analyzer could, but that's fine.
Cause we can just slow
down the computer. Right, Right.
And I've got a potential
amateur on the clock module
and I've turned it down
to a, you know, heartbeat
tempo, and I've effectively got
a real time logging system.
And what's nice about it
is that, you know, Arduinos
are, you know, extensively, low
level, but really quite high
level. And you can write
some very high level code
to say, all right, I'm
going to do this on
the rising edge. And I'm
going to check for high
on that and low on
that. And in about 13,
14 lines of code, I'm
literally looking at that voltage.
And when I was seeing
that benign versus that AA
and without that Arduino, there's
no way I would have
been, I don't even know
you're right. I have no
idea how I would have
figured that out. So let
me ask this kind of
ignorant question because I've ordered
a better, a silver scope.
So I can go and
look at one bit with
a multi meter and I
can look at one bit
over time as a voltage
with a silver scope and
an L a logic analyzer
is kind of like both
of those devices and times
over time with all of
their potential inputs. Yeah. Something
like that. I was thinking,
all right, I'm going to
run down and end up
becoming an electrical engineer when
I'm done with all of
this stuff. Oh, it's been
absolutely fascinating to do this.
And I have only in
just a few minutes, I've
been able to talk to
you, scratch the surface. The
material that you've got up
on your YouTube is absolutely
extraordinary. And I love that
you make it available for
free folks can check out
your stuff@eater.net, the video tutorials,
whether it be building AP
CPU from scratch the 65
Oh two project that I'm
doing as well as some
really amazing videos, we didn't
even get a chance to
talk about like learning how
the internet works or you're
assumed to be legendary. Let's
build a video card from
scratch, which is really hot
on Reddit. People cannot believe
that you're that you did
that. And that's absolutely an
extraordinary video series as well.
I really appreciate you chatting
with me today. We've been
talking with Ben eater. This
is another episode of Hanselman
And we'll see you again
next week. .